# Electricity-load-consumption

The cluster analysis plays an important role in various applications today. Particularly, it is widely used as one of the step of data exploration. In clustering we aim to find similarities between observations, and, based on this, form homogeneous groups in such a way that an object is closer to observations from the same group than to other ones. This type of analysis may contribute to better understanding of the data structure with a view to interpret it and discover hidden obstacles.
Nowadays, clustering problem is well developed. There exists a lot of methods that propose a solution. It can be connectivity-based algorithm(hierarchical clustering), grouping around centroids (k-means), or a method that estimates distribution of the model (the EM algorithm). However, in real applications different issues are arose in the analysis. One the most common is the curse of dimensionality. A particular case can be data of curves. In this case, the sample data are realizations of a random function that is defined on a continuous set. A set of problems that work with such data is called functional data analysis.
Today, the analysis of functional data is a topical problem. Its application includes eco- nomics, meteorology, medicine and other domains [1, 2, 3]. In this paper we consider one spe- cific issue, namely, daily consumption of electricity. Each observation represents summarised by consumers electricity load through a day. Such aggregated load has a property to be smooth, thereby the data can be considered as functional.
The aim of this paper is to study techniques of the cluster analysis in a situation when data is functional. More specifically, we want to find partition of the electricity load data. To cluster this data properly, here, we consider dimension reduction procedure. It can be b- spline projection or functional principal component analysis. This technique leads to the case of multivariate analysis that is well studied for the cluster analysis.
This paper is organized as follows. Chapter 1 introduces functional data and tools that are closely connected to it, namely, b-spline approximation as well as functional principal component analysis. Chapter 2 describes popular clustering algorithms. In addition, methods of model selection and comparison are reviewed. Chapter 3 presents statement of the electricity load clustering problem. Then, the experiment description and numerical results are presented. Finally, results are summarised in conclusion.
